 Hello, my name is Gabriella and I'm a rising junior in dual majoring computer science and physics. I'm interested in the artificial intelligence and machine learning field, specifically in natural language processing and automation. I have worked on projects that put those interests to use like being a research assistant on a project for automated patent landscaping. Where we automated the process and received accuracy scores on patents processed through the USB T-O alongside coding, an audio transcription model, and we value it in its accuracy on another project that utilizes live learning environments to be able to be more accessible for students in virtual environment. I have also entered with cyber mobile and Microsoft and worked on language and automation projects where I learned about large language models and helped site reliability engineers on their heavy workloads by shortening the time spent on it with my automation code. I am interested in this internship since my values align directly with Microsoft's especially when it comes to transforming the AI and machine learning scene while being innovated as well as healthy people in their daily lives of this technology. I feel that my biggest strengths are my curiosity and willingness to learn new things and be able to adapt to fast changes in trends, especially with AI. And my skill set that I have been able to acquire across my research is that internships can help give a fresh to perspective to problems that may be arising in this field. I know that Microsoft puts a lot of focus on the customer and the impact that it is giving from products to services as well as a team friendly environment where it is vital to be a team player and collaborate with others in order to blossom in the industry and have always appreciated that approach. I believe I would be the right person for this position given my experience and willingness to try new things even if there are fields I had never touched before since I am dedicated to learning new things that are true curiosity and find the potential in new fields that can help assist people in the environment despite it not looking like you can be on the first try. Thank you so much.